---
layout: blank.njk
tags: post
title: "the academic website is the closest thing we have left to internet independence : or, is it okay that most of us don't want to code?"
---
# the academic website is the closest thing we have left to internet independence: or, is it okay that most of us don't want to code?

*this post is evolving and occasionally updated/edited.*

*I do not personally endorse the claims, opinions, language, or content available on anything linked on my site; this is purely for information-and-or-joy-sharing purposes.*

If you're interested in mathematics or its many related fields, you've probably come across The Academic Homepage. On these personal sites, PhD students, postdocs, and professors list––often with distressing inconsistency––links to CVs, papers published, courses taught, and research group descriptions. Maybe you've seen one of [these](https://jekyll-themes.com/academicpages/academicpages.github.io) Jekyll themes, which are popular due to their integration with GitHub Pages. Or maybe you've visited Terence Tao's famous and richly informative [Wordpress blog](https://terrytao.wordpress.com). But my favorite academic websurfing experience is encountering content that's more personal, opinionated, or downright wild. 

Many of my mathematically involved friends relish in the same hobby, and it seems that the online community [does, too](https://www.reddit.com/r/math/comments/hrbnzn/fun_mathematics_professor_websites/). It's nice to see your often-terrifying professors humanized by webpages that have more than a CV. Some of my favorite websites include [Bozho's incredibly designed php site](http://theo.inrne.bas.bg/~bozho/index.php); [Professor Zeilberger's extensive css-free list of opinion posts](https://sites.math.rutgers.edu/~zeilberg/OPINIONS.html), which features descriptive titles such as "Opinion 145: The Tail of Statistics, Will (soon) Wag the Dog of Mathematics, and instead of 'Statistics is a Mathematical Science' we would say that 'Mathematics is a Statistical Science'"; [Professor Montgomery's academic page](https://people.ucsc.edu/~rmont/), whose essay about his refusal to close his office window and its eventual breakage at the hands of a SWAT team sent to take over his office and close said window I encourage you to read; and [Professor Schwartz's page](https://www.math.brown.edu/reschwar/), whose incredible comic titled ["It's fun to pee"](https://www.math.brown.edu/reschwar/ComixFun/index.html), as well as [whatever this incredible work of art is, in complete seriousness](https://www.math.brown.edu/reschwar/Comix/helix.pdf), should be required viewing. 

My love for these sites led to the creation of my own. I summoned what HTML I had retained from making profile layouts for online games and started publishing webpages. At first, I glorified the oldweb out of nostalgia. I wasn't online for the 1995-2010 web explosion, and, like many young people chasing the past for aesthetic, my imagination of history is marred with misconceptions. Something may be notable because it preceded digital algorithms, but that shouldn't be a value judgement. In recent years, I've tried to have a more thoughtful engagement with digital history and culture, and have come out feeling strongly about the importance of doing so.

As my academic interests unintentionally swerved towards computer science, I struggled to understand the implications of a career in it. Pursuing something purely for intellectual reasons, regardless of ethical and social concerns, honestly disturbs me. It's something that I can't sit with, though there are many that do, and I don't think I'm in a place to judge or congratulate them for it. I've been trying to pull together the starting threads of a mostly-unseriously dubbed "cyberethos;" this blog post is meant to trace some of those ideas.

What I mean by a cyberethos, primarily, that I am a strong advocate for computing as a [critical practice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_practice). But the ideas differ in their identification of practitioners. The cyberethos applies to everyone: people who should be thoughtful and accountable about digital realities are't just those who count "computer science" amongst the primary descriptors of their work. The most obvious area where this applies is the rising concern about "enshittification" or the "digital enclosure":

*"The private ownership of such enclosures aims to separate users from the means of interaction, transaction, communication, and expression, much like the farmer's separation from the land some centuries before \[...] this new form of separation is even more seductive, as it provides real benefits to the users. Communication and the purchasing of goods are streamlined and simplified, but users have little control over how their collected information is collected, used, and sold."*

We are forced to divide our multiplicity of personas across various pre-built applications. This separation is often advantageous and efficient. It also requires we relinquish control over our internet existences, often before we realize the scope of the consequences. We dislike how our data is bought and sold; we dislike the ease of LLMs and endless automatic video recommendations. We like the Internet and the freedoms it sees to represent (sell?). Forced participation in an interactive economy which, to many, provides "real benefits" creates an morally fraught––but deeply fascinating––system of tradeoffs. And yet many of us do not want to code, by which I really mean people online have no idea how to act.

These "Internet bargains" are an incredibly important tool for understanding recent technosocial history, and in subliminal and surface ways, they are guiding our decisions about artificial intelligence today. Our loss of autonomy on digital platforms and its increasingly material consequences are not without context. Every student learns about global history; this makes them something of a better person, a better citizen. Or, if you don't believe in the school system as it is, it indoctrinates them into some kind of standardized behavior. But to call upon Internet history, a body which has barely gone cold, is understandably rare practice. Right now, it falls upon the individual to educate themself.

The cyberethos is not about standardization, per se, but about realizing that the digital and material world are coherent in beautiful ways. Every other digital crisis is deemed "unprecedented," but it doesn't exist in a vacuum. I think the questions now are not just about asking for digital freedoms on a structural scale (rejecting enshittification), but an intimately personal one (developing and embracing a cyberethos). What scares me now is not just the reluctance to govern digital danger, but that governing is not enough. The deals we make with technology are deeply personal, and they are often defined by a speed and pleasure that biologically dominates us. What do we desire out of technology, and what sorts of sacrifices are we making for it? When will we look inwards and ask: what it is we will do to make ourselves free?

This blog post is intended to grow over time. Some threads I hope to pick up include: 

- **Oldweb as archive and gallery**: record keeping, non-material archival practices, understanding digital presentation as curation
- **Design in the digital and physical world**: understanding ties between technological efficiency and minimalism, economic and tech-centric language 
- **The emergence of Internet art**: art not as product but as derivative, digital scarcity, immateriality, digital freedom movements, formality and professionalism versus amateurism and democratized artistic opportunity
- **Cyberfeminism**: the original cyberfeminist movement, Afrofuturism, technology as radical upending and as reinforcement, unequal rates of tech diffusion, the AI-generated female object, digital intersectionality
- **Cybermedievalism**: the meme as digital folklore, digital enclosure as return to serfdom, puritannical revival, today's Internet as pre-Renaissance
- **Infinite Jest**: decision making, separation of productive and unproductive pleasure, government controls on personal decision/preference
- **Personal sites**: how academic roots have shaped web history, contrasts arising from technological speed and communicating the semi-archaic movement of academia on the web
- **Technoeugenics**: technological proficiency and understanding as a measure of worth, technocrats, productivity economies
- **On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog**: surveillance and the death/myth of online anonymity, the mirror faces of protected free speech and anonymized hateful behavior
- **Alternative AI**: radical re-imaginations of art to emphasize humanity, the ALife movement, ecological and environmental concerns, environmental justice
- **Mass Indie**: rates of sharing, pro-diversity and post-scarcity

## Early Internet and the Prof. Dr. Site
The earliest computers bore little resemblance to modern laptops and were confined to institutions with the necessary knowledge and resources, chiefly militaries and governments. In the next stage, primitive personal computers functioned only in the hands of dedicated hobbyists who took the time to learn. By the time computers became household staples, they were hardly recognizable: instead of connecting wires and switches, we were clicking colorful icons and navigating premade applications. And this evolution is––supposedly––good. If we accept *a priori* that "democratizing" (sue me) technology is a net good by some agreed-upon metric, ease-of-use should be very high priority. This necessitates huge simplifications that limit what increasingly-unspecialized userbases can break or manipulate. And this is––supposedly––not so good? Today, it's common to complain about "enshittification" (and I would agree), but there's also a strange balance to strike between digital enclosures and the needs of accessible technology. We can observe these conflicting ideas about simplicity in the "Prof. Dr." site.
- *Side note: This whole "if-you-want-it-you're-probably-too-lazy-to-deserve-the-full-thing" schtick also leads us to this entire mess of technocrats or, having just made this term up, technoeugenics, i.e., those who believe they have the right to steer humanity because we're all bashing stones together and their deep knowledge of the inner workings of stones warrants the right to, like, control the stones and the aforementioned bashing and the achievement of global dominance along the way...?*


The first Internet site went live in 1991. The webpages that followed were simple, text-based, and run essentially exclusively by academics, researchers, and government employees. The 1995 rise of graphical browsers and websurfing reshaped most of the then-existing Internet. Today, it is difficult to find sites from 1993-1994 that have maintained their original look. Remarkably, Internet archivist, activist, and artist [Olia Lialina's](https://art.teleportacia.org) method for finding 1993-style sites is simply Googling "Prof. Dr.," leading to the aptly named ["Prof. Dr. Style"](https://contemporary-home-computing.org/prof-dr-style/) for webpages. This is so intuitive but so genius. Of course academic pages have their aesthetic roots in the oldweb––they literally defined the early internet. 

The effectiveness and archival importance of the Prof. Dr. site is ridiculous but charming. In Lialina's words, *"Primitivity tells us the story of the browser being not only a browser, but also an editor. **Every user of the early web was a producer** of web content \[...] **Prof. Dr. pages look terribly the same.** As if they were generated automatically \[...] **Though, ironically, they are among the last pages generated completely by humans**, not content management systems or services."*

I'm fascinated by these threads of convenience, uniformity, design, and humanity. The Prof. Dr. site flourished because of how little you could do with it. They were easy to set up, easy to replicate, and easy to view. Today, I would argue the Prof. Dr. style is one of the most creative and effort-intensive Internet presences one can have. The work it takes to create and publish a personal page is so outsized compared to that of, say, an Instagram profile, that the apparent "sameness" of the Prof. Dr. page now feels deeply compelling and personal. How distressing, how beautiful, how far we've come!

## The Motherfxxking Website 
The Prof. Dr. naturally leads to the philosophy of the [MotherFxxing Website](https://motherfuckingwebsite.com), followed by a chain of other "motherfxxing websites" whose language I do not necessarily endorse: 

- [https://perfectmotherfuckingwebsite.com/](https://perfectmotherfuckingwebsite.com/)
- [https://thebestmotherfucking.website/](https://thebestmotherfucking.website/)
- [http://bettermotherfuckingwebsite.com/](http://bettermotherfuckingwebsite.com/)
- [https://evenbettermotherfucking.website/](https://evenbettermotherfucking.website/)

The MotherFxxking Website is a semi-recent phenomenon, and through it, we can understand how the Internet experience has diverged into two paths: one for creators and one for users. In the Prof. Dr. era, "user" and "creator" were essentially synonymous. Today's Internet surfer has likely never managed or even edited a page on their own. The modern webmaster has to ask what purpose their digital presence serves and whether the external viewer has anything to do with it. If we take the stance of the Motherfxxking Website, then we assume that a proper website is outwards-facing, i.e., something whose primary goal is to be viewed and understood. It makes sense, then, that the "perfect" Motherfxxking Website is lightweight, legible, and accessible. That's where all this "motherfxxking" language comes from: it's the in-your-face all-that-you-need of a website, like it or not. 

I would agree that good communication is often concise. But I'm not sure about the Motherfxxking Website. Especially in the context of the Internet, I find it hard to believe that professionalism and refinement should be the ultimate goals. And though a cumbersome "40-pound jQuery file and 83 polyfills" isn't something we should encourage, I do think that amateurism should be valued and actively embraced. The heavyset garishness of web-learning-by-doing is something that I miss, though I wonder, too, why that really is. Refined websites aren't necessarily restrained. Some of my personal favorites, like [koilwood](https://koilwood.neocities.org), [fileto](https://fileto.neocities.org), and [juneish](https://juneish.neocities.org), are exploding with care and creativity. On sites like those, it's not like I find myself wishing for more. 

I love to put the cluttered 90s disastersite on a pedestal, but I don't want to equate "having a bunch of stuff online" with being genuine (and is being genuine the goal here?). Social media is oversaturated with influencers who literally overshare their overcurated online presence *as a full time job*. Volume of output has nothing to do with its authenticity. Still, so much of my online experience has been about reduction and selection. I have so much to say, and the process of choosing *what* to say is something I do everywhere else in my life. I want the Internet to be the place where I leave it all behind, but it isn't. I resent my own self-censoring and I'm embarrassed to be embarrassed. Plus, there's something spooky about existing openly online now vis-à-vis data and your digital footprint...

## On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog
In 2023, Peter Steiner's 1993 cartoon for *The New Yorker,* titled, "On the Internet, nobody knows you're a dog," [sold for $175,000 at auction.](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/the-most-reprinted-new-yorker-cartoon-breaks-record-at-auction-for-a-single-panel-comic-180983135/) It's sometimes interpreted as the first Internet meme, and many view it as the first major sign of the Internet's public popularity. I'm fascinated by this cartoon and the conversations around Internet anonymity which, apparently, started 30 years ago. I see this thread everywhere: the Dog With A Blog sitcom, for example, or Apple's [Cyberdog](https://oldvcr.blogspot.com/2023/10/teaching-apple-cyberdog-10-new-tricks.html). The comic's title opens Chapter 1 of Marie Meixnerová's *#mm net art: Internet Art in the Virtual and Physical Space of Its Presentation,* too, which is an amazing anthology of early Internet art.

I'm struck, too, by Lialina's 2025 ["On the Internet, everybody knows you had a dog,"](https://ontheinterneteverybodyknows.geocities.institute) which features, among other things, "Web pages of people who also had dogs," "Web pages people made in memory for their dogs," "Web pages made by people to sell dogs to other people," and "Web pages made by dogs." Lialina writes, *"There is no separate category for each dog breed because—despite its name and appearance—**this work is not really about dogs. It’s about people who built the web by making pages about the things they loved."*** And if that doesn't make you cry a little, I don't know what will. Physical artwork requires an explicit sharing; the webpage is simply lost and found. 

On the Internet in 2025, not only does everyone know you're a dog, but they know your breed, pedigree, history of ownership, diet, walk routine, history of vet visits, what you looked like as a puppy, how you flunked out of police dog school, how you were never satisfied with your chihuahua of a father, how things were never the same after they razed your favorite park in favor of a cat hotel, and how your hip dysplasia is leading slowly but surely to a final day of steak and euthanasia. 

## Infinite Jest and Internet Bargains

David Foster Wallace has a lot to say about––amongst other things––pleasure, addiction, nationalism, and bargains with technology in *Infinite Jest.* Though I have certain gripes with the book, it is one of my favorites and I admire everything it stands for. It was published in 1996 but could easily have been released today... or five years in the future. 

Here are some excerpts from Wallace's 1996 interview with Judith Strasser (transcript from [here](https://tonyreinke.com/2018/03/05/david-foster-wallace-on-entertainment-culture/)):

"*I think a lot of this sort of huggermugger in the book comes down to the fact that the government can’t really do a whole lot. That our decisions about how we relate to fun and entertainment and sports and pretty much anything, are very personal, private; they’re sort of between us and our heart. \[...] What’s going to happen is that these are decisions that are going to have to be made inside us as individuals about **what we’re going to give ourselves away to and what we aren’t.***"

"*Well, I think the pressures aren’t just on us, but I think they’re on the TV networks, which are businesses in which have found out that entertaining news is vastly more profitable. The reason for that is that we, as an audience of individuals, seem to be voting with our wallets for the entertaining news. The changes that are going to need to come, I think, are going to need to come in terms of our own individual taste rather than any sort of laws passed on the networks about violence or news content or anything like that.*"

"*It just, I guess my point is, right now and I think the next 15 or 20 years are going to be a very scary and sort of very exciting time when **we have to sort of reevaluate our relationship to fun and pleasure and entertainment because it’s going to get so good, and so high pressure, that we’re going to have to forge some kind of attitude toward it that lets us live.***"

"*\[...] they seem to involve people who’ve sort of bottomed out on the great American way of life who are having now to sort of redefine and remake some kind of force that they’re going to give themselves away to. \[...] The scariest thing about our relationship to pleasure and entertainment is that as we get more and more “decadent” and more and more unhappy, I think, at a certain point, **we are going to be desperate enough to have other people just tell us what to do**; that \[...] fascism \[...] is going to look viable to a lot of people. I think it’s pretty scary.*"

I'm hesitant to say much about *Infinite Jest*. It's not possible for me to make more out of something so full. The fact that this was conducted in 1996, just 3 years after the Internet went public, is astounding. I don't mean that the interview is a prediction about digital proliferation; in *Infinite Jest,* characters are still renting physical InterLace cartridges to play on screens, Blockbuster style. I'm interested because digital economies are a subset of attention economies, and digital problems should––but often aren't––understood as an exacerbation of more fundamental ones. 

The interview's focus on individual restraint and its pairing with the inadequacy of legislation is compelling. I'm reminded of the American TikTok ban, which was reversed in under a day after enormous pushback from young users. The ban could have been legitimately dubious for many reasons, but I remember feeling uneasy; in my view, the resistance was non-negligibly, if not primarily, driven by addiction. After all, had the exodus to RedNote been motivated by a real desire for cross-national online connection or principled retaliation, then American presences on Chinese platforms would have persisted after TikTok access was restored. And attempting to protect the free speech enabled by online platforms by flocking to an explicitly censored one is an interesting ironic statement at best and slightly insane at worst. As a cynic on the protest abilities of the average American TikTok user, too, I find it funny to see what sorts of things are deemed worth fighting for. 

I say this not to call for downright technological anarchy. I question commonly cited TikTok resistance narratives because, regardless of what people will tell you, their feelings about tech regulation are enormously shaped by concerns about personal pleasure. When it comes to overreliance on legislation, I think of the current AI safety movement and its devotion towards governance. These efforts are laudable and entirely fair. We know, too, that legal regulation has its flaws, and I wonder why there has been such little effort to address the second half of the problem: ourselves. When it comes to addressing the cultural and systemic issues which enable and reinforce AI-related harms, why do so many of the safety enthusiasts disappear? Technical intersectionality finds itself unable to extend beyond a certain idea of rigor or relevance. Then the work of those on the outside is deemed uninformed and non-technical. It is the responsibility of "experts" to expand their understandings of what constitutes knowledge and impact. And it is the responsibility of the everyday user to ask more critically: what is it that we want? What is good for us? Is that which is available fulfilling those roles? And if not, why consume it?